Revamp the `Filters` page (#2717)
apache/logging-log4j2: src/site/antora/modules/ROOT/pages/manual/filters.adoc

[id=filters]
= Filters
:stem:

Filters are Log4j plugins that evaluate the parameters of a logging call or a log event and return one of three results:

> ACCEPT:: The log event is accepted by the filter and goes to the next stage of the logging pipeline.

Author: By "stage" I mean the 4 stages explained below.
An `ACCEPT` result will end filter evaluation for that stage, regardless of other filters in the chain.

> ACCEPT:: The log event is accepted by the filter and goes to the next stage of the logging pipeline.

Reviewer: I personally did not understand this _"skipping the rest of the filters in the current stage"_ part – I would appreciate it if we can explicitly state this short-circuiting behaviour.

> ACCEPT:: The log event is accepted by the filter and goes to the next stage of the logging pipeline.

Author: Fixed in 2cde19bec61964536b33d11635712c9ae8d21fd8

> ACCEPT:: The log event is accepted by the filter and goes to the next stage of the logging pipeline.

Reviewer: LGTM, I've dropped a minor suggestion: https://github.com/apache/logging-log4j2/pull/2717/files#r1668407817

Additionally, the following configuration attributes take part in the filtering process:

* the xref:manual/configuration.adoc#logger-attributes-level[`level` attribute] of logger configuration elements.
* the xref:manual/configuration.adoc#appenderref-attributes-level[`level` attribute] of appender reference configuration elements.

[#filtering-process]
== Filtering process

Due to the interaction of many elements,
the filtering process in Log4j is quite complex and can be divided in four stages:

. <<logger-stage,`Logger` stage>>
. <<logger-config-stage,`LoggerConfig` stage>>
. <<appender-control-stage,`AppenderControl` stage>>
. <<appender-stage,`Appender` stage>>

[IMPORTANT]
====
For performance reasons, log events should be filtered at the earliest possible stage.
This reduces the cost of disabled log events:
e.g., log event creation, population of context data, formatting, transfer through an asynchronous barrier.
====

[#logger-stage]
=== 1. `Logger` stage

[plantuml]
....
@startuml
start
group Logger

:A Logger method;

switch (Apply global filter)
case (DENY)
    #pink:Discard;
    detach
case (ACCEPT)

> case (NEUTRAL)

Author: I added an admonition in 4d0d7aa6c4c2ca8f9ad92621e50f8b513e59ec71.

    else (no)
        ' The label improves spacing
        label a1
    endif
endswitch
end group
:Create LogEvent;
stop
....

The parameters of the logging call are passed to the global filter.
If the global filter returns:

DENY:: The log message is immediately discarded.
NEUTRAL:: If the level of the log message is less severe than the configured logger threshold, the message is discarded.
Otherwise, a
link:../javadoc/log4j-core/org/apache/logging/log4j/core/LogEvent.html[`LogEvent`] is created and processing continues.
ACCEPT:: A `LogEvent` is created and processing continues in the next stage.

[TIP]
====
Filtering logging calls at this stage provides the best performance:

* this stage precedes the creation of log events, therefore operations like the
xref:manual/thread-context.adoc[injection of context data],
xref:manual/layouts.adoc#LocationInformation[computation of location information]
will not be performed for disabled log statements.
* this stage precedes the asynchronous calls performed by either
xref:manual/async.adoc[asynchronous loggers]
or
xref:manual/appenders.adoc#AsyncAppender[asynchronous appenders].
====

[#logger-config-stage]
=== 2. `LoggerConfig` stage

> [plantuml]

Author: Fixed in 2cde19bec61964536b33d11635712c9ae8d21fd8

....
@startuml
start
group LoggerConfig
repeat

:LoggerConfig.log();

if (Apply logger filter) then (DENY)
    #pink:Discard;
    detach
else (not DENY)
    ' The label improves spacing
    label a1
endif
repeat while (Go to parent logger?) is (yes)
-> no;
end group
stop
@enduml
....

> In this stage, log events are evaluated by all the

Author: Fixed in 2cde19bec61964536b33d11635712c9ae8d21fd8

Due to the
xref:manual/configuration.adoc#logger-attributes-additivity[additivity of logger configurations],
this means that a log event must also pass the filters of all the parent loggers,
until it reaches the logger that references the chosen appender.

[#appender-control-stage]
=== 3. `AppenderControl` stage

[plantuml]
....
@startuml
!pragma useVerticalIf on
start
group AppenderControl

:AppenderControl.callAppender();

if (Is less severe then appender reference level?) then (yes)
    #pink:Discard;
    detach
else (no)
    ' The label improves spacing
    label a2
endif
if (Apply appender reference filter) then (DENY)
    #pink:Discard;
    detach
else (not DENY)
    ' The label improves spacing
    label a1
endif
end group
stop
@enduml
....

To pass this stage, log events must satisfy both conditions:

* the log event must be at least as severe as the
xref:manual/configuration.adoc#appenderref-attributes-level[`level` attribute]
of the appender reference.
* the xref:manual/configuration.adoc#appenderrefs-elements-filters[appender reference filter] must return `ACCEPT` or `NEUTRAL`,

[#appender-stage]
=== 4. `Appender` stage

[plantuml]
....
@startuml
start
group Appender

> :Appender.append();

Author: Fixed in 2cde19bec61964536b33d11635712c9ae8d21fd8

if (Apply appender filter) then (DENY)
    #pink:Discard;
    detach
else (not DENY)
    ' The label improves spacing
    label a1
endif
end group
#palegreen:Log message;
@enduml
....

When log events reach an appender,
the filter attached to an appender is evaluated and if the result is `DENY`,
the log event is discarded.

[NOTE]
====
Some appenders like the
xref:manual/appenders.adoc#AsyncAppender[asynchronous appender]
use appender references to transfer log events to other appenders.
In such a case, the filtering process goes back to the <<appender-control-stage,`AppenderControl` stage>>.
====

[TIP]
====
Users migrating from Log4j 1 often replace the `threshold` property of a Log4j 1 appender with a <<ThresholdFilter>> on the equivalent Log4j 2 appender.

Using the `level` property of appender references will give a better performance.
====

[WARNING]
====
Configuring filters is a measure of last resort,
since it adds a large overhead to disabled log events.

> You should rather configure the filtering in one of the previous stages.

Author: Nice catch!

I was obviously talking about the appender filters, which are the worst performance-wise.

Fixed in 4d0d7aa6c4c2ca8f9ad92621e50f8b513e59ec71.

====

[#example-configuration-file]
=== Example configuration file

The following example shows the order in which filters are evaluated:

[tabs]
====
XML::
+
[source,xml]
----
include::example$manual/filters/filters.xml[lines=1;18..-1]
----

JSON::
+
[source,json]
----
include::example$manual/filters/filters.json[]
----

YAML::
+
[source,yaml]
----
include::example$manual/filters/filters.yaml[lines=17..-1]
----

Properties::
+
[source,properties]
----
include::example$manual/filters/filters.properties[lines=17..-1]
----
====

<1> Global filter

> <2> Logger `level` attribute (it is skipped if the event matches the global filter)

Author: Fixed in 4d0d7aa6c4c2ca8f9ad92621e50f8b513e59ec71.

<3> Filter of the "org.example" logger
<4> Filter of the root logger (it is the parent of the "org.example" logger)
<5> Appender reference `level` attribute
<6> Filter of the appender reference
<7> Filter of the appender

[#common-configuration]
== Common configuration

[#common-configuration-attributes]

> === Common configuration attributes

Author: Initially there were links there, but I found the presence of too many links distracting.

I added the links again inin 4d0d7aa6c4c2ca8f9ad92621e50f8b513e59ec71.

* if the last sub-filter returns `NEUTRAL`, the `Filters` plugin returns `NEUTRAL`.

The `Filters` plugin together with the ternary logic of filters, can be used to express all the boolean operators.
In the following examples `A` and `B` are two filters.

`NOT A`::
You can invert the functionality of filter `A` by swapping the `onMatch` and `onMismatch`:
+
[source,xml]
----
<A onMatch="DENY" onMismatch="NEUTRAL"/>
----

`A AND B`::
To select the events that match both `A` and `B` you can use:
+
[source,xml]
----
<Filters>
  <A/>
  <B/>
</Filters>
----

`A OR B`::
To select the events that match `A` or `B` we can replace `NEUTRAL` with `ACCEPT` in the `onMatch` attribute:
+
[source,xml]
----
<Filters>
  <A onMatch="ACCEPT"/>
  <B onMatch="ACCEPT"/>
</Filters>
----

xref:plugin-reference.adoc#org-apache-logging-log4j_log4j-core_org-apache-logging-log4j-core-filter-CompositeFilter[📖 Plugin reference for `Filters`]

[#collection]
== Collection

Log4j Core provides the following filters out-of-the-box.

[#timestamp-filters]
=== Timestamp filters

Timestamp filters use the timestamp of log events to decide whether to log them or not.

[#BurstFilter]
==== `BurstFilter`

> The `BurstFilter` uses the _sliding window log_ algorithm to limit the rate of log events.

Author: I add a description in 6448bdbb604651d99c71df1cda9b17f887f1bd29.

The rate limit is only applied to log events less severe than a configured log level.

Besides the common configuration attributes,
the `BurstFilter` supports the following parameters:

.`BurstFilter` -- configuration attributes
[cols="1m,1,1,4"]
|===
|Attribute | Type | Default value | Description

| level
| link:../javadoc/log4j-api/org/apache/logging/log4j/Level.html[`Level`]
| link:../javadoc/log4j-api/org/apache/logging/log4j/Level.html#WARN[`WARN`]
| The rate limit only applies to log events less severe than this level.
Events at least as severe as this level will always match.

| rate
| `float`
| `10`
| The average number of events per second to allow.

| maxBurst
| `long`
| `10 &times; rate`
| The maximum number of events in a sliding window.

|===

> The sliding window can be easily computed as:

Author: Some users (cf. [this SO question](https://stackoverflow.com/q/72000886/11748454)) want to have more control on the frequency used to log events.

In the case of the `SMTP` appender it really makes sense to have 1 e-mail per hour instead of 24 e-mail at once and then silence.

Fixed in 2cde19bec61964536b33d11635712c9ae8d21fd8.

[stem]
++++
wi\ndow = (m\axBurst) / (rate),

> ++++

Author: It is not easy to use STEM in Antora, so I removed it in 6448bdbb604651d99c71df1cda9b17f887f1bd29.

[source,yaml,indent=0]
----
include::example$manual/filters/TimeFilter.yaml[tag=filter]
----

Properties::
+
.Snippet from an example {antora-examples-url}/manual/filters/TimeFilter.properties[`log4j2.properties`]
[source,properties,indent=0]
----
include::example$manual/filters/TimeFilter.properties[tag=filter]
----
====

xref:plugin-reference.adoc#org-apache-logging-log4j_log4j-core_org-apache-logging-log4j-core-filter-TimeFilter[📖 Plugin reference for `TimeFilter`]

[#level-filters]
=== Level filters

The following filters allow you to filter log events based on their level.

[#LevelMatchFilter]
==== `LevelMatchFilter`

The `LevelMatchFilter` matches log events that have exactly a certain log level.

Besides the common configuration attributes, the `LevelMatchFilter` supports the following parameter:

.`LevelMatchFilter` -- configuration attributes
[cols="1m,1,1,4"]
|===
| Attribute | Type | Default value | Description

| level
| link:../javadoc/log4j-api/org/apache/logging/log4j/Level.html[`Level`]
| link:../javadoc/log4j-api/org/apache/logging/log4j/Level.html#ERROR[`ERROR`]
| The filter only matches log events of this level.

|===

[TIP]
====

> If you wish to use a different log file for each log level, you can also use a

Author: I think they should.

Personally I don't find the practice of splitting each log level in a separate file very useful, since you need to look at several files to give a context to each event.
However, in UNIX the `/var/log/mail.*.log` files have been traditionally split per level, so we want to give users the same opportunity here.

Fixed in 4d0d7aa6c4c2ca8f9ad92621e50f8b513e59ec71.

> If you wish to use a different log file for each log level, you can also use a

Reviewer: Please note that my question wasn't `can or should they split logs by level`, but `can or should they use routing appender instead`.

> If you wish to use a different log file for each log level, you can also use a

Author: Yes, I understood.

My rant was about splitting logs by level, but my fix explains why they should use `Routing` instead of `LevelMatchFilter`. :wink:

[#MarkerFilter]
==== `MarkerFilter`

The `MarkerFilter` matches log events marked with a specific marker or **any** of its descendants.

Besides the common configuration attributes, the `MarkerFilter` supports the following parameter:

.`MarkerFilter`—configuration attributes
[cols="1m,1,1,4"]
|===
|Attribute | Type | Default value | Description

| marker
| link:../javadoc/log4j-api/org/apache/logging/log4j/Marker.html[`Marker`]
|
| The filter only matches log events of marker with the given marker or one of its descendants.

**Required**

|===

xref:plugin-reference.adoc#org-apache-logging-log4j_log4j-core_org-apache-logging-log4j-core-filter-MarkerFilter[📖 Plugin reference for `MarkerFilter`]

[#message-filters]
=== Message filters

Message filters allow filtering log events based on the
xref:manual/messages.adoc[`Message`]
contained in the log event.

include::partial$manual/log-event.adoc[]

[#RegexFilter]
==== `RegexFilter`

The `RegexFilter` matches a regular expression against either the result of
link:../javadoc/log4j-api/org/apache/logging/log4j/message/Message.html#getFormat()[`Message.getFormat()`]
or

> link:../javadoc/log4j-api/org/apache/logging/log4j/message/Message.html#getFormat()[`Message.getFormattedMessage()`].

Reviewer: Shouldn't we document (also in `StringMatchFilter`) that this filter eagerly formats a message, which can be an expensive operation? Consider: `log.info("foo {}", () -> expensiveOp())`.

Author: Fixed in 4d0d7aa6c4c2ca8f9ad92621e50f8b513e59ec71.

| xref:manual/markers.adoc[`Marker`]
| The marker used in the log statement.

| message
| xref:manual/messages.adoc[`Message`]
a| The message used in the log event if the user directly supplied one.
Otherwise:

* If the logging statement contained an `Object` argument, it is wrapped in a
xref:manual/messages.adoc#ObjectMessage[`ObjectMessage`].
* If the logging statement contained a format `String`, it is wrapped in a
xref:manual/messages.adoc#SimpleMessage[`SimpleMessage`].

| parameters
| `Object[]`
| The parameters passed to the logging call.
Some logging calls include the parameters as part of `message`.

| throwable
| `Throwable`
| The `Throwable` passed to the logging call, if any.
Some logging calls include the `Throwable` as part of `message`.

| substitutor
| link:../javadoc/log4j-core/org/apache/logging/log4j/core/lookup/StrSubstitutor.html[`StrSubstitutor`]
| The `StrSubstitutor` used to replace lookup variables.

|===

For the remaining filters, only these bindings are available:

.Script Bindings -- internal filter
[cols="1m,1,4"]
|===
| Binding name | Type | Description

| logEvent
| link:../javadoc/log4j-core/org/apache/logging/log4j/core/LogEvent.html[`LogEvent`]

> | The LogEvent being processed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| The log event being processed.
```

[id=filters]
= Filters

Filters are Log4j plugins that evaluate the parameters of a logging call or a log event and return one of three results:

ACCEPT:: The filter accepts the log event.

> Other filters in the same filtering stage are not evaluated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This effectively causes other filters in the same filtering stage to be skipped.
```
